---
title: "Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells"
layout: page
---


<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Name examples of prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms
* Compare and contrast prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells
* Describe the relative sizes of different kinds of cells

</div>

Cells fall into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. The predominantly single-celled organisms of the domains Bacteria and Archaea are classified as prokaryotes (*pro*- = before; -*karyon*- = nucleus). Animal cells, plant cells, fungi, and protists are eukaryotes (*eu*- = true).

# Components of Prokaryotic Cells

All cells share four common components: 1) a plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the cell’s interior from its surrounding environment; 2) cytoplasm, consisting of a jelly-like region within the cell in which other cellular components are found; 3) DNA, the genetic material of the cell; and 4) ribosomes, particles that synthesize proteins. However, prokaryotes differ from eukaryotic cells in several ways.

A **prokaryotic cell**{: data-type="term"} is a simple, single-celled (unicellular) organism that lacks a nucleus, or any other membrane-bound organelle. We will shortly come to see that this is significantly different in eukaryotes. Prokaryotic DNA is found in the central part of the cell: a darkened region called the nucleoid ([\[link\]](#fig-ch03_02_01)).

 ![In this illustration, the prokaryotic cell has an oval shape. The circular chromosome is concentrated in a region called the nucleoid. The fluid inside the cell is called the cytoplasm. Ribosomes, depicted as small circles, float in the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is encased in a plasma membrane, which in turn is encased by a cell wall. A capsule surrounds the cell wall. The bacterium depicted has a flagellum protruding from one narrow end. Pili are small protrusions that extend from the capsule in all directions.](../resources/Figure_03_02_01.jpg "This figure shows the generalized structure of a prokaryotic cell."){: #fig-ch03_02_01}

Unlike Archaea and eukaryotes, bacteria have a cell wall made of peptidoglycan, comprised of sugars and amino acids, and many have a polysaccharide capsule ([\[link\]](#fig-ch03_02_01)). The cell wall acts as an extra layer of protection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and prevents dehydration. The capsule enables the cell to attach to surfaces in its environment. Some prokaryotes have flagella, pili, or fimbriae. Flagella are used for locomotion, while most pili are used to exchange genetic material during a type of reproduction called conjugation.

# Eukaryotic Cells

In nature, the relationship between form and function is apparent at all levels, including the level of the cell, and this will become clear as we explore eukaryotic cells. The principle “form follows function” is found in many contexts. For example, birds and fish have streamlined bodies that allow them to move quickly through the medium in which they live, be it air or water. It means that, in general, one can deduce the function of a structure by looking at its form, because the two are matched.

A **eukaryotic cell**{: data-type="term"} is a cell that has a membrane-bound nucleus and other membrane-bound compartments or sacs, called **organelles**{: data-type="term"}, which have specialized functions. The word eukaryotic means “true kernel” or “true nucleus,” alluding to the presence of the membrane-bound nucleus in these cells. The word “organelle” means “little organ,” and, as already mentioned, organelles have specialized cellular functions, just as the organs of your body have specialized functions.

# Cell Size

At 0.1–5.0 µm in diameter, prokaryotic cells are significantly smaller than eukaryotic cells, which have diameters ranging from 10–100 µm ([\[link\]](#fig-ch03_02_02)). The small size of prokaryotes allows ions and organic molecules that enter them to quickly spread to other parts of the cell. Similarly, any wastes produced within a prokaryotic cell can quickly move out. However, larger eukaryotic cells have evolved different structural adaptations to enhance cellular transport. Indeed, the large size of these cells would not be possible without these adaptations. In general, cell size is limited because volume increases much more quickly than does cell surface area. As a cell becomes larger, it becomes more and more difficult for the cell to acquire sufficient materials to support the processes inside the cell, because the relative size of the surface area across which materials must be transported declines.

![Relative sizes on a logarithmic scale, from 0.1 nm to 1 m, are shown. Objects are shown from smallest to largest. The smallest object shown, an atom, is about 1 nm in size. The next largest objects shown are lipids and proteins; these molecules are between 1 and 10 nm. Bacteria are about 100 nm, and mitochondria are about 1 &#xB5;m. Plant and animal cells are both between 10 and 100 &#xB5;m. A human egg is between 100 &#xB5;m and 1 mm. A frog egg is about 1 mm, a chicken egg and an ostrich egg are both between 10 and 100 mm, but a chicken egg is larger. For comparison, a human is approximately 1 m tall.](../resources/Figure_03_02_02.jpg "This figure shows the relative sizes of different kinds of cells and cellular components. An adult human is shown for comparison."){: #fig-ch03_02_02}

# Section Summary

Prokaryotes are predominantly single-celled organisms of the domains Bacteria and Archaea. All prokaryotes have plasma membranes, cytoplasm, ribosomes, a cell wall, DNA, and lack membrane-bound organelles. Many also have polysaccharide capsules. Prokaryotic cells range in diameter from 0.1–5.0 µm.

Like a prokaryotic cell, a eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes, but a eukaryotic cell is typically larger than a prokaryotic cell, has a true nucleus (meaning its DNA is surrounded by a membrane), and has other membrane-bound organelles that allow for compartmentalization of functions. Eukaryotic cells tend to be 10 to 100 times the size of prokaryotic cells.

# Multiple Choice

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which of these do all prokaryotes and eukaryotes share?

1.  nuclear envelope
2.  cell walls
3.  organelles
4.  plasma membrane
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
D

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
A typical prokaryotic cell \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ compared to a eukaryotic cell.

1.  is smaller in size by a factor of 100
2.  is similar in size
3.  is smaller in size by a factor of one million
4.  is larger in size by a factor of 10
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>

# Free Response

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Describe the structures that are characteristic of a prokaryote cell.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a plasma membrane and have DNA, cytoplasm, and ribosomes, like eukaryotic cells. They also have cell walls and may have a cell capsule. Prokaryotes have a single large chromosome that is not surrounded by a nuclear membrane. Prokaryotes may have flagella or motility, pili for conjugation, and fimbriae for adhesion to surfaces.

</div>
</div>

